CALite video

1. Intro

GSCALite is for Gene Set Cancer Analysis,  

		 to analyze and visualize the expression variation correlation of a gene set in cancer with flexible manner. 

		 GSCALite is an open-source web-based platform 

		 designed to perform gene set analysis for big multi-omics cancer data and drug sensitivity. 

		 GSCALite consists of three major datasets including

		 multi-omics data from TCGA over 10,000 samples across 33 cancer types, 

		 about  700 drug data from Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer and 

		 Cancer Therapeutics Response Portal (Drug Sensitivity), 

		 and normal tissue expression data of over 10,000 samples from GTEx. 

		 The all-in-one platform allows users to input a customized gene set from interested genes or pathways

		 then select cancer types or tissues and analyses at welcome page. 

		 As a result, publication-ready figures and tables will be dynamically generated, displayed and downloaded on each page.

		 2. Input gene set and select datasets and analyses



		 In the following video, I will show you how to use this all in one platform，

		 The input box can be input gene set, here, click show me example, 

		 the example gene set is the part of EGFR pathway genes, 

		 I  add extra oncogene TP53 and MYC, 

		 Then click search button.

		 The select frame pop out, on the left we can select dataset. 

		 The default selected dataests are three kindney caners and two lung cancers.

		 We can search the data by input brca, then click TCGA-BRCA, it is added for analysis

		 and we can find GTEx normal tissue below and add two tissues.

		 The right select frame is for analysis, 

		 three default analyses are selected, here for examples,  we select all analyses.

		 Then click start  analysis button

		 the progress bar will be popped out, 

		 and wait for a few minutes, and  then check the result on left menus.


		 3. Content

		 The result is indexed on the left,

		 Click TCGA cancer, the analysis modules are listed, click mRNA expression, the gene set expression result is presented,

		 The top content of page are the information guide and description

		 Click the help, the detailed methods and each result description is listed. 

		 Users can check this information. And the blue box listed number of selected cancer types.

		 The following tabs are the main results of this module, the first is the tumor versus normal expression,  

		 bubble plot present the result, red and blue dots indicates the differential expression, x axis is the selected cancer types and y axis is the gene symbol, 

		 The legend shows the fold change and FDR,

		 This result can be downloaded pdf png and eps for further editing.

		 Here we choose pdf, and users and resize the downloaded figures. 

		 Click download, a publication ready figures is downloaded as pdf format.

		 —————

		 The second tab is a table of the differential expression result, it can be sort by fold change, this is useful for user to download for further analysis
		 —————

		 The third tab is survival analysis,

		 Also, this is a bubble plot, the bubble plot can represent multiple genes in several cancer types with log rank p value  and worse type.

		 For tumor samples, the samples are divided into two groups by the median expression of a gene, the red dot is for high and blue dot is for low expression. 

		 The survival worse means the gene high or low expression is worse for survival.

		 —————

		 The next analysis based on mRNA expression is the subtype analysis.

		 The analysis combines the gene expression and clinical subtype data, 

		 we only present result with p-value less than 0.05, so the x axis only has four cancer types and y axis remains significant genes.

		 —————

		 On SNV module, the top guide information is similar to the mRNA expression module.

		 On result tabs part, 

		 The SNV percentage profile gives a whole picture of gene set mutation across selected cancer types. 

		 The red color indicates the mutation frequency.

		 On SNV summary tab, this contains more detailed mutation result, 

		 such as the number of snp and small indels on the first figure, 

		 mutation types on the second figure, and mutation signatures on the third.

		 The SNV oncoplot gives the gene mutation in samples, 

		 we can see TP53 has higher mutation rate across samples.

		 On SNV survival analysis, 

		 this part classifies the tumor samples with mutations and without mutations, 

		 only TP53 has enough samples in two cancer types for the survival analysis.


		 CNV
		 —————

		 For copy number variation analysis, 

		 The copy number data from TCGA are generated by the GISTIC, 

		 the output of GISTIC gives the gene fragment with heterozygous and homozygous mutations.

		 On CNV Pie tab, the result gives input gene set copy number variation across selected cancer types.

		 The red indicates the amplification and green indicates the deletion, 

		 and deep color  is for Homozygous and shallow for  heterozygous.

		 And the pie chart represent the percentage of the gene copy number mutation in cancer types.


		 For the Hete and Homo CNV profile result,

		 These figures list the detailed copy number variation in the cancer types.

		 On the CNV to Expression result, 

		 because of the CNV affecting the gene mRNA expression, 

		 we calculated correlation of gene CNV with its mRNA expression. And gives the significant result

		  

		 —————
		 On methylation module,

		 From TCGA methylation data, 

		 we compares tumor and normal sample gene methylation level,

		 Like the differential mRNA expression, 

		 we get the differential methylation result between tumor and normal samples. 

		 We keep significant result, and insignificant result is filtered out, the bubble plot is similar to the mRNA expression result.

		 And combines the clinical data, we do survival analysis based on the methylation using median level as cut.

		 As methylation can affect the gene mRNA expression, we also calculate  correlation of methylation and its gene mRNA expression.


		 —————
		 Pathway activity module, 
		 TCGA provides about 200 protein data, 

		 and using these limited RPPA data, 

		 we get ten important cancer related pathways scores.

		 Using these ten pathway scores, 

		 we calculate input gene set with the pathway scores, 

		 and we can get the correlation of activation and inhibition of the gene.

		 On global percentage tab, 

		 the pie chart give the pathway and gene set activation and inhibition.

		 The heatmap percentage tab is the detailed activation and inhibition, 

		 and the number represent the percentage of activation or inhibition across cancer types.

		 For selected cancer types, 

		  the relation network tab gives the more detailed interaction of cancer types and input gene set with ten pathways.



		  —————
		  For miRNA network module, 

		  We combined the TCGA miRNA and mRNA expression data and known miRNA with its targeted genes, 

		  We build the miRNA and input gene set network for filtering candidate miRNAs with user interested genes.

		  Users can click the help to read the method of the part.

		  The result are two display network by D3 and visNetwork package.  

		  Users can select interested miRNA or genes in the network, the result can be downloaded as html.

		  —————

		  For drug sensitivity analysis,

		  Drug sensitivity and gene expression profiling data of cancer cell lines in GDSC and CTRP are integrated into GSCALite. 

		  The expression of each gene in the gene set was performed by Spearman correlation analysis with the small molecule. 

		  Correlations with FDR less than 0.05 were filtered as significant ones and displayed on the Drug Sensitivity module


		  ————

		  For GTEx normal tissue module 
		  This module is used for gene set tissue specificity analysis. 

		  This analysis offers a comprehensive display of expression profiling and eQTL information for gene set in the selected normal tissues. 





